On-Board Learning-Based Scheduler with Vision-Based Look-Ahead for Agile Earth

Observation

Student and Host Information
 Student: Sanaa Bensaid
 Programme: Master in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
 Institution: École Supérieure d’Informatique, Sidi Bel Abbès (ESI-SBA)
 Academic Year: 2025–2026
 Project Type: Final-Year Project (FYP) in collaboration with ASAL
1. Background and Motivation
Earth observation (EO) satellites play a central role in environmental monitoring, natural hazard assessment, and
climate research. Nevertheless, their scientific return is constrained by several factors: fixed orbital trajectories,
limited agility, restricted onboard power, and downlink bandwidth. A substantial fraction of collected images
can be partially or fully unusable due to cloud cover or suboptimal targeting, while attitude maneuvers and
sensor operations consume scarce resources.
Traditional planning approaches typically generate observation schedules on the ground hours in advance. Such
static plans cannot adequately react to rapidly evolving phenomena, such as cloud dynamics or sudden onset of
wildfires and floods. Recent work on dynamic targeting has shown that equipping satellites with a look-ahead
sensor and a learning-based onboard planner can significantly improve the selection of observation
opportunities, increasing the amount of useful data gathered under resource constraints.
In this context, Algeria’s ALSAT platforms offer a unique opportunity to explore on-board autonomy tailored
to national priorities such as wildfire and flood monitoring. This project proposes to design and evaluate an on-
board learning-based scheduling system that uses a low-resolution forward-looking camera to anticipate
cloud cover and autonomously choose which targets to image and when, under realistic orbital, attitude, and
power constraints.
2. Problem Statement
The core problem addressed by this project is the following:
Given a satellite carrying a primary imaging instrument and a forward-looking camera, operating along a known
orbit and subject to power and attitude constraints, how can an onboard decision-making system select, in real
time, both (i) which ground targets to image and (ii) when to image them, so as to maximize the number of high-
quality, high-priority observations?
Key challenges include:
 Uncertain environment: Cloud cover and atmospheric conditions evolve on time scales comparable to
orbital motion.
 Limited resources: The satellite must respect constraints on battery state, pointing agility, and
instrument duty cycle.
 Real-time constraints: Onboard decisions must be made within strict computational and timing
budgets.
 Mission priorities: Some geographical regions and phenomena (e.g., active wildfires, floods, critical
infrastructure) have higher priority than others, and this must be reflected in the scheduling logic.
The project seeks a learning-based, on-board solution that uses information from a vision-based look-ahead
module to improve scheduling decisions beyond what static or purely heuristic planners can achieve.
3. Project Objectives
The project is structured around the following main objectives:
1. Formal Modelling of the Scheduling Problem
o Model the satellite imaging scheduling task as a sequential decision-making problem (e.g.,
Markov Decision Process or semi-Markov Decision Process), where the state includes:
 Cloud or visibility information from the forward-looking camera.

 Target priorities on the ground track.
 Power and battery status.
 Attitude and orbital context (e.g., current pointing, angular distance to candidate
targets).

2. Design of a Learning-Based Scheduling Policy
o Develop an onboard decision policy that maps the current satellite state to imaging actions:
 Selection of a target (including the possibility of “no imaging”).
 Optionally, selection of the next decision time within a given look-ahead window.
o Candidate methods may include reinforcement learning (e.g., actor–critic, Deep Q-Networks),
imitation learning (e.g., behavioral cloning from expert or heuristic policies), or hybrid
approaches.

3. Development of a Vision-Based Look-Ahead Module
o Implement a lightweight vision module for the forward-looking camera to estimate cloud
presence or visibility conditions ahead of the satellite:
 Possible techniques include compact convolutional neural networks, lightweight
vision transformers, or classical image processing enriched with learned components.
o Emphasis will be placed on low model complexity and low latency compatible with edge or
flight-like hardware.

4. Integration in a Realistic Simulation Environment
o Integrate the learning-based scheduler and vision module into a satellite simulation
environment configured for ALSAT-type orbits and scenarios representative of Algerian
wildfires and floods.
o Potential simulation frameworks include spacecraft dynamics and EO mission simulators
(e.g., Basilisk/BSK-style tools, GMAT-based environments, or ASAL internal frameworks),
combined with real or realistic EO datasets.

5. Explainability and Operator Trust
o Design mechanisms to interpret and visualize the scheduler’s decisions, enabling operators to
understand:
 Why a specific target was imaged or skipped.
 How cloud estimates, target priority, and power status influenced the decision.
o Example techniques include saliency or attribution maps, feature-importance scores, and rule-
based post-hoc explanations.
4. Work Plan (Indicative Timeline – 7 Months)
 December – January
o Detailed literature review on dynamic targeting, learning-based satellite scheduling, and edge
vision.
o Specification of the state–action–reward model and identification of candidate learning and
vision techniques.
o Selection and initial configuration of the simulation environment and datasets.
 February
o Implementation and validation of the orbital and platform simulation (ALSAT-like orbit,
simplified attitude, and power models).
o Integration of a basic forward-looking camera model.
 March – April
o Development of the first version of the learning-based scheduler (e.g., an initial reinforcement
learning or imitation learning approach).
o Implementation of the initial vision-based cloud/visibility estimator and its coupling to the
scheduler’s state.
o Early experiments and exploratory tuning.
 May

o Systematic experimental campaign on wildfire and flood case studies; comparison with
baseline planners.
o Refinement of models, hyperparameters, and reward functions; initial explainability tools.
 June
o Consolidation and documentation of the software prototype.
o Writing of the thesis, preparation of the oral defense, and drafting of a publication-oriented
manuscript or extended report.

5. Conclusion
This project proposes a learning-based, vision-informed on-board scheduling system for Earth observation
satellites, with a specific focus on ALSAT-type platforms and Algerian disaster monitoring needs. By combining
sequential decision-making, lightweight vision models, and realistic simulation, the work aims to advance the
state of autonomous EO planning and to contribute concrete tools and insights that can be leveraged by ASAL
and the wider research community.
References
Dynamic targeting and learning-based EO planning
1. Breitfeld, A., Candela, A., Delfa, J., Kangaslahti, A., Zilberstein, I., Chien, S., &amp; Wettergreen, D.
(2025). Learning-Based Planning for Improving Science Return of Earth Observation
Satellites. arXiv:2509.07997.​
2. Breitfeld, A., Candela, A., Chien, S., et al. (2024). Reinforcement and Imitation Learning for
Improving Science Return of Earth-Observing Satellites. i-SAIRAS 2024.​
3. Kangaslahti, A., Candela, A., Chien, S., et al. (2024). Dynamic Targeting of Satellite Observations
Incorporating Observation Value Decay and Operational Constraints. ICRA 2024 (or similar robotics
venue).​
4. Candela, A., Swope, J., &amp; Chien, S. (2024). Search Applications for Integrated Planning and Execution
of Satellite Observations using Dynamic Targeting. PlanRob / ICAPS workshop.​
5. NASA JPL AIG (2020–2025). Dynamic Tasking / Dynamic Targeting project page and technical
notes. NASA JPL AI Group technical documentation.​
RL and learning for satellite scheduling / agile EO
6. Herrmann, A., Schaub, H., et al. (2024). Single-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Scalable Earth-
Observing Scheduling. Acta Astronautica (or related journal).​
7. Mission Sequence Model and Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Intelligent Mission Planning for
Earth Observation Satellites (2025). Remote Sensing or similar open-access journal.​
8. Deep Reinforcement Learning-Assisted Large Neighborhood Search for Earth-Observing Satellite
Scheduling (2025). Expert Systems with Applications (in press).​
9. Deep Reinforcement Learning–Driven Multi-Satellite Collaborative Observation Planning for Natural
Disasters (2025). International Journal of Digital Earth (or similar).​
10. Wei, X., et al. (2021). Multi-objective Deep Reinforcement Learning and Parameter Transfer for
Satellite Task Scheduling. Aerospace Science and Technology.​
11. Chen, J., et al. (2021). Scheduling Agile Earth Observation Satellites with Recurrent Neural
Networks. Acta Astronautica.​
12. Bérignon, T., et al. (2021). Mission Planning for Earth Observation Satellite with Dynamic Targets and
Cloud Cover Uncertainty. Aerospace Science and Technology.​
AI for autonomous satellites and on-board edge computing
13. Thangavel, K., et al. (2024). Artificial Intelligence for Trusted Autonomous Satellite Operations: A
Survey. Acta Astronautica.​
14. Fontanesi, G., et al. (2025). Artificial Intelligence for Satellite Communication: A Survey. Digital
Communications and Networks (or similar).​
15. Applications of AI in Space Domain (2025). ACM Computing Surveys or Communications of the ACM
(space AI overview).​
16. NASA JPL (2025). How NASA Is Testing AI to Make Earth-Observing Satellites Smarter. JPL News
Feature on Dynamic Targeting flight experiments.​
17. UN-SPIDER / Wu et al. (2024). AI-Enabled Onboard Edge Computing for Satellite Intelligence in
Disaster Management. UN-SPIDER technical note / review.​
18. Small Sat Trends and Cyber Considerations (2025). Space ISAC White Paper – section on autonomy
and onboard AI.​
On-board AI &amp; dynamic targeting mission concepts

19. Candela, A., Swope, J., Bosch-Lluis, X., et al. (2021–2023). Dynamic Targeting to Improve Earth
Science Missions. AIAA / IEEE conference papers and technical reports.​
20. SMICES / Smart Ice Cloud Sensing mission concept papers (2021–2023). Machine Learning and AI
for Storm and Cloud Targeting from Spaceborne Radar-Radiometer Systems. NASA ESTO / IIP-19
publications.​
21. “Dynamic Targeting on CogniSAT-6 – Flight Report” (2025). ASTRA / i-SAIRAS 2025 slides and
paper.​
Optimization and planning for EO missions (useful background)
22. Quantum Algorithms Applied to Satellite Mission Planning for Earth Observation (2023). Machine
Learning and Quantum Computing for EO mission optimization.​
23. Search and Heuristic Planning for Satellite Dynamic Targeting (2023–2024). Workshop papers linked
to the JPL DT project.



CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 python -m scripts.training.train_ppo_smdp_full \ --bc --curriculum --eval \ --episodes 2000 --event-rate 4.0 \ --n-envs 2 --seed 42 \ --action-mask --domain-rand \ --cnn-model models/cloud_cnn_real.pt \ --ent-coef 0.05 \ > logs/master_training.log 2>&1 & $ echo "Master PID: $!"

CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1 python -m scripts.training.ablation_runner \ --variant full_system no_bc no_curriculum no_smdp gaussian_cloud circular_cnn \ --seeds 42 123 456 \ --episodes 2000 --n-envs 1

CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1 python -m scripts.training.ablation_runner \
    --variant full_system no_bc no_curriculum no_smdp gaussian_cloud circular_cnn \
    --seeds 42 123 456 \
    --episodes 2000 --n-envs 1 